CITATION SPLITTING HILLCLIMB — DRAFT EXPERIMENT CONTRACT

Scope and status
---------------
This is a deterministic splitting experiment over common-law-cite's real Rust
splitSources API. The implementation is
crates/legal-citations/src/source.rs and its existing API dispatch. No alternate
parser, reimplementation, mocked response, URL score, or extraction-only score
counts as a splitting result. Keep runtime inputs and receipts in a private,
ignored experiment directory. No production source changes are allowed before
an executable baseline. The initial source inventory is initial-source-sha256.json; its exact
bytes and every recorded source digest are retained.

This branch preserves draft source for review. Runtime inputs and baseline
evidence are not included. Path configuration and corpus integration are
unfinished; see README.md. The workflow below is a proposed future experiment,
not authorization to execute it as part of this preservation handoff.

This document is a proposed contract until ledger.py freeze records its SHA-256,
the evaluator SHA-256, the fixture-manifest SHA-256, and the dev-fixture SHA-256.
Fixture authoring and evaluator corrections/self-tests must finish before that
freeze. Once frozen, these files cannot change during the experiment. A necessary
harness correction invalidates the affected comparison and requires an explicitly
new experiment and baseline; it cannot silently improve a score.

Access separation
-----------------
Use an explicitly authorized, independently labeled full citation-splitting
corpus as the PRIMARY accuracy corpus. Its verified source manifest, existing split
assignment, literal inputs, and independent expected spans must be retained.
It is not interchangeable with extraction-only gold or unrelated corpora. Do not
start tuning or freeze the primary accuracy benchmark until that gold is available
and the evaluator has verified its schema. Any independently invented synthetic
fixtures are AUXILIARY and retain their family-based development and sealed-holdout
assignments. Report auxiliary metrics separately; they cannot
change primary denominators, replace the required primary baseline, or substitute
for a primary accuracy gain.

The PRIMARY development split may be inspected, scored, and used to design
candidates.
The independently authored sealed holdout must not be read, searched, previewed,
used for candidate selection, or executed during development. Only the evaluator
may open it after the final accepted candidate is locked. Keep the sealed
manifest's hashes, counts, and declared categories as opaque metadata. Do not use
material outside the corpus authorized by the verified source manifest.
Do not expand, re-label, or cherry-pick the
fixture scope after freeze. Independently invented provenance is mandatory for
new publishable fixture examples under the repository's AGENTS.md.

Deterministic contract
----------------------
The fixture manifest and evaluator define the exact API options, character-offset
unit, partition normalization, invalid-output policy, and metric denominators.
Use the same options and normalization for baseline, every candidate, and holdout.
Offsets are Unicode code-point indices; never silently treat UTF-8 byte offsets
or UTF-16 code units as characters. Confirm that API option at execution.

The splitting target is an ordered partition of the COMPLETE original input.
Every nonempty input must have contiguous positive-length spans from zero through
len(text), preserving every character including whitespace, delimiters, footnote
markers, combining marks, and supplementary Unicode characters. The empty input
has the empty partition. An explicitly reported whitespace-only abstention may
normalize to one full whitespace span, with a recorded normalization reason. This
structural special case cannot repair a substantive abstention. Delimiters and whitespace belong to their deterministic
side under the evaluator's frozen convention. A semantic extraction abstention
must not be converted into a successful non-whitespace partition by a fallback.
Malformed offsets, overlaps, reordered parts, mismatched text, dropped characters,
or invented characters fail preservation and receive no successful partition.
The evaluator must validate raw API spans and delimiter evidence BEFORE any
normalization. Normalization cannot repair a semantic omission.

Primary metric: exact whole-partition accuracy, compared as integer correct-case
counts on the SAME fixed dev cases. A case succeeds only when the complete ordered
predicted span list exactly matches gold and character preservation succeeds.
Secondary gates: micro exact-span F1 and micro internal-boundary precision and
recall. Exact spans match only identical (case id, start, end) triples; boundaries
match only identical (case id, internal character offset). Input endpoints are
not internal boundaries. Compute score comparisons from integer TP/FP/FN counts
using rational arithmetic, avoiding rounded-display comparisons. Empty-denominator
conventions must be fixed in the evaluator before baseline. Extraction diagnostics
are reported separately and never substitute for splitting scores or move the
fixture scope. URL generation/correctness is outside this experiment.

Baseline and source controls
----------------------------
1. Verify the initial repository inventory and working-tree provenance. Build the
   real engine only with an authorized existing or isolated toolchain. Record the
   exact build/check commands, return codes, compiler version when available,
   source inventory SHA-256, CLI binary SHA-256, and timestamps. No downloaded
   parser or alternate language implementation may stand in for this engine.
2. Run evaluator self-tests, including malformed spans, delimiters, Unicode
   offsets, invalid-output scoring, abstention, and metric-denominator edge cases.
   Independently review the assertions and compare hand-computed metric examples.
3. Freeze the contract after fixture and evaluator review. Run the exact dev
   baseline command through ledger.py baseline. The command receipt records
   argv, cwd, source inventory and binary hashes, output and return code. A missing
   compiler/binary, failed build, failed evaluator, or partial timeout is a BLOCKED
   or FAILED RUN with no baseline metrics. Do not invent scores or claim success.
4. Save all baseline case outcomes. The set of original baseline-success case ids
   is immutable for retention checks. Baseline invalid cases remain visible;
   do not silently drop them or redefine denominator size.

Candidate cycle
---------------
Every candidate gets a unique attempt id, a concrete hypothesis, and an exact
binary-capable git patch against the unchanged repository HEAD, including new
untracked source/conformance files. Save a content-hashed source inventory too.
The ledger refuses to open an attempt without an executable baseline and refuses
a new attempt until the checkout matches the accepted incumbent. It detects
changes to the frozen contract and original source before baseline. Direct edits
outside the ledger are still subject to these protocol restrictions.

Each production behavior change must carry the repository-required conformance
cases. Citation regexes belong in the grammar corpus with vectors and manifest
updates; registry data stays in JSON; bindings stay thin. Do not turn passing
conformance cases into pending or weaken expected outputs to fit a candidate.

For each attempt:
  a. Open an attempt while the checkout is exactly the accepted incumbent.
  b. Make one coherent parser change plus required conformance/vector changes.
  c. Capture exact patch and source inventory before measurement.
  d. Run cheap correctness checks first, recording argv/cwd/log/return code and
     source hash. At minimum use the evaluator's fast contract checks and the
     targeted engine tests for affected behavior. Checks must exit successfully
     against the candidate source; a check that changes source is invalid.
  e. Build the real candidate CLI as necessary, record binary and source hashes,
     then run the COMPLETE frozen dev split, never a hand-selected subset. The
     latest ledger build receipt for that CLI must succeed with the exact measured
     source inventory and output binary hash; unrelated or stale binaries fail.
  f. Accept only if ALL gates below pass. Record every rejection and its reasons.
     Roll back rejected production changes to the accepted incumbent before
     opening another attempt. The ledger does not perform destructive resets.

Acceptance gates, all mandatory:
  - Full dev execution succeeds with the frozen contract and the same case ids.
  - All-character preservation succeeds on EVERY dev input.
  - Whole-partition exact count is STRICTLY higher than the current incumbent.
  - Every ORIGINAL BASELINE-success case remains a whole-partition success.
  - Every CURRENT INCUMBENT-success case also remains a whole-partition success;
    accepted new wins cannot be traded away by later candidates.
  - Exact-span F1 is nondecreasing relative to the current incumbent.
  - Internal-boundary precision AND recall are each nondecreasing relative to
    the current incumbent.
  - Required cheap correctness/conformance checks pass against the measured
    source, and report/binary/source hashes match the actual measured artifacts.

Ties are rejections. A diagnostic improvement, speed difference, better URL,
extraction gain, or changed fixture count cannot override a gate. Record runtime
only as execution evidence; no timing-optimization claim is supported here.
No arbitrary attempt count or elapsed-time budget is a stopping criterion.
Continue while useful, authorized work is possible, stopping only for a genuine
blocker, an explicit user stop, or demonstrated exhaustion of the frozen scope.
Scope exhaustion requires evidence that remaining misses were examined and the
bounded plausible correction routes were exhausted, not a convenient batch size.
Agree reporting checkpoints before the experiment. A reporting milestone is not
an automatic stop.

Final lock and holdout
----------------------
After the final dev decision, restore the accepted incumbent, rerun any checks
required by actual later source changes, and create the evaluator's final-
incumbent lock. The lock identifies the exact dev receipt, frozen contract,
source inventory, options, and CLI SHA-256. Append a final-lock event to the
ledger. This ends candidate mutation and development selection in this experiment.

The evaluator may now run holdout EXACTLY ONCE against that locked binary and
contract. Its durable one-shot marker must be created before opening the sealed
input, so a failed or interrupted execution cannot be silently retried. Save the
holdout receipt separately. Do not adapt the parser, fixtures, evaluator, or
normalization using the holdout result. A holdout failure is reported as such.
If no real dev baseline or final lock exists, holdout remains unopened.

Evidence and reporting
----------------------
Use append-only JSONL events chained by SHA-256. Every run identifies the actual
command, UTC timestamp, source and binary hashes, receipt/log hashes, and status.
Every measured candidate identifies its exact patch, scores, constraint checks,
and keep/reject reason. Preserve failed builds and toolchain probes without
mislabeling them as measured candidate attempts. Never fabricate a baseline,
score, elapsed time, test execution, independent review, or holdout result.
The final report distinguishes what was authored, executed, measured, accepted,
and blocked. It links artifacts and states the remaining blocker plainly.

Local command interface (requires portability work and corpus/harness review)
------------------------------------------------------------------------
ledger.py freeze records the actual reviewed --evaluator, --fixture-manifest,
--dev-fixture, --protocol, --initial-source and --harness-manifest files. Override
fixture paths for the verified primary corpus; do not point the primary contract
at auxiliary synthetic data. --required-check-label may be supplied repeatedly
at freeze; its defaults are source-tests and conformance. Freezing opens no holdout and does not
create an executable baseline.

Typical sequence, using actual paths from the verified manifest:
  python3 ledger.py freeze --fixture-manifest VERIFIED_MANIFEST \
    --dev-fixture VERIFIED_PRIMARY_DEV
  python3 ledger.py build --cli BUILT_REAL_CLI -- \
    cargo build --locked \
    -p legal-citations-cli --release
  python3 ledger.py baseline --cli BUILT_REAL_CLI
  python3 ledger.py begin --id candidate-001 --reason 'Concrete hypothesis'
  [make the candidate's production and required conformance changes]
  python3 ledger.py check --label source-tests -- \
    cargo test --locked \
    -p legal-citations --lib
  python3 ledger.py build --cli BUILT_REAL_CLI -- \
    cargo build --locked \
    -p legal-citations-cli --release
  python3 ledger.py check --label conformance -- python3 \
    check_conformance.py --cli BUILT_REAL_CLI \
    --output UNIQUE_CANDIDATE_CONFORMANCE_RECEIPT
  python3 ledger.py measure --cli BUILT_REAL_CLI
  [restore the accepted incumbent after any rejected candidate]
  python3 ledger.py lock

Run required broader repository checks for the final change. The ledger's lock
only creates the final-incumbent receipt; it does not read or evaluate holdout.
The evaluator owns the guarded one-time holdout invocation. 'probe' is suitable
for environment, build and self-test evidence and never declares a parser score.
'attempts.jsonl' is a local append-only hash-chained audit trail, not a defense
against intentional replacement of the complete audit directory.

Preexisting repository-check failures
------------------------------------
For a future experiment, capture the untouched baseline's actual check failures
in private baseline-checks.json with raw command return codes and log hashes.
These are not candidate gains and must not be called passing repository tests.
Record declared-pass successes and pending cases that already satisfy their
expected results. Do not bulk-promote or weaken preexisting baseline debt.

conformance-baseline.json records all baseline case identities and content hashes
without exposing their citation text. check_conformance.py runs the original
repository runner and retains its actual return code/report/log. Its separate
regression gate requires unchanged inputs and expectations for every existing
case, no deleted or demoted declared-pass case, every original success retained,
exactly the same recorded preexisting NOW PASSING maintenance failures, and no new
failures. Additional candidate conformance cases must be declared pass and pass.
A legitimate newly passing pending case outside that recorded set must have its local
status corrected with the behavior change, per AGENTS.md; no unrelated status
promotion is allowed. The wrapper's success explicitly means no new regression
relative to this frozen baseline, not that the raw command succeeded.

The future frozen ledger includes baseline-checks.json, conformance-baseline.json,
the wrapper and its tests. Any preexisting repository failures remain reported as
baseline limitations; do not silently exclude them from reports or claim they
were fixed. Required targeted
engine checks must execute tests (the example runs all engine library tests);
zero matched tests are not meaningful correctness evidence. A grammar/corpus
change must address the corresponding grammar validation; the known grammar
failures do not grant blanket permission to ignore new failures.
